# Algorithmic Tools for Mining the Motif Structure of Networks (ECML-PKDD '22)

Motifs are small subgraph patterns that play a key role towards understanding the structure and the function of biological and social networks. The current *de facto* approach towards assessing the statistical significance of a motif $\mathcal{M}$ relies on counting its occurrences across the network, and comparing that count to its expected count   under some null generative model. This approach can be misleading due to *combinatorial artifacts*.  That is, there may be a large count for a motif due to multiple copies sharing many vertices and edges connected to a subgraph, such as a clique, that completes the multiple copies of the motif.  

    In this work we introduce the novel concept of an $(f,q)$-spanning motif. A motif $\mathcal{M}$ is $(f,q)$-spanning if there exists a  $q$-fraction of the nodes that induces an $f$-fraction of the occurrences of $\mathcal{M}$ in $G$. Intuitively, when $f$ is close to 1, and $q$ close to 0, most of the occurrences of $\mathcal{M}$ are localized in a small set of nodes, and  thus its statistical significance is likely to be due to a combinatorial artifact. We propose efficient heuristics for finding the maximum $f$ for a given $q$ and minimum $q$ for a given $f$ for which a motif is $(f,q)$-spanning and evaluate them on real-world datasets. Our methods successfully identify combinatorial artifacts that otherwise go undetected using the standard approach for assessing statistical significance.  
     
    Finally, we leverage the motif structure of a network to design \ms, an algorithm that takes as input a graph and two   motifs $\mathcal{M}_1, \mathcal{M}_2$, and finds subgraphs of the graph where $\mathcal{M}_1, \mathcal{M}_2$ occur infrequently and frequently respectively. We show that a good selection of $\mathcal{M}_1, \mathcal{M}_2$ allows us to find anomalies in large networks, including bipartite cliques in social graphs, and subgraphs rated with distrust in Bitcoin  markets.  
